In the middle of my junior year, I was diagnosed with leukemia and subsequently had a stroke. My cognitive faculties were left untouched, but I have motor deficits. The improved presentation now is that I use an assistive device, like a walker, to ambulate. Typing and handwriting are still impractical due to my impaired fine motor function, and I have spastic dysarthria, meaning that I have weakness in my articulators, a slower rate of speech, and difficulty changing pitch.

A few days after the stroke, I was awarded the Goldwater scholarship. Ironically, when the diploma arrived in the mail, I was unable to hold it, as my hands were too shaky. To give an idea, I refused to touch my smartphone until a few months after the stroke because it was too frustrating to have the device in my hands, but not be able to control it.

As the weeks started to pass by and the reality of a long stroke recovery settled in, I was faced with the question as to whether I wanted to give up. My choice to not do so was motivated by two main reasons. For one, I had an excellent support system. Other than the amazing healthcare professionals who I interacted with, my mother, brother, and then-girlfriend from college coordinated to ensure that I was never alone at the hospital. The second factor that motivated me was the idea that if I managed to be successful in my stroke recovery, I could have a research career ahead of me. When I would talk with the psychologist at the hospital who was following me at the time, I would tell her about my dreams of attending graduate school with my barely understandable speech from my wheelchair. Indeed, it is magical to realize that this could be a reality in the near future.

Soon afterward, I was transferred to another hospital that had the capability to offer me acute rehabilitation in conjunction with inpatient chemotherapy treatment. When I first entered into acute rehab, I was informed that therapy ran from Monday till Saturday, with a break only on Sunday. I soon learned that there are no breaks if one wants to succeed in neurological rehabilitation. After all, the brain can't tell if it is a weekend or weekday. I only cried a few times when I was in the hospital. The first few times were due to intense chemotherapy-related pain from mouth sores and a chemical burn in my groin area. Then there was a situation where my blood pressure was elevated due to my chemotherapy treatment. However, I did not cry because of that. Rather, I had a scheduled physical therapy session and I was informed that because of the aforementioned reason, I had to cancel it. I cried because I saw this as a rode block for the rehab that I was working so hard on.

After four months in the hospital, I returned home. Unfortunately, I was met with a particularly insidious combination of my motor impairment and chemotherapy treatment. I was being given high-dose steroids. This caused side effects like sleep issues and an increased appetite in the typical patient. However, in my case, everything was exacerbated by my motor impairment. I was eating every 2 or 3 hours even at night, and I wasn't able to sleep. Since I couldn't make food for myself or go to the toilet myself, my parents set up a call button for me to be able to ring them when I needed help, which was around two to three times a night for a good 2 months. This period was frustrating, as I was either too tired or hungry to spend time on the rehabilitation that was so important to me.

Once these issues subsided, I spent most of the first year and a half at home working to become physically independent. My physical therapist introduced me to a myriad of exercises. These included calf raises, sit-to-stands, yoga mat exercises, aquatic physical therapy including swimming, walking with a walker, trekking poles, and on a treadmill, recumbent bike, rowing machine, balance exercises in a corner, and using steps with a side railing. I would send long emails to my physical therapist regarding the specifics of each of these exercises every week with a speed of 20 words per minute on my keyboard (for reference, the normal speed is 40).

Then, I discovered speech-to-text. However, the computer doesn't always understand me.

I frequently deal with dictation misrecognitions. There are two primary facets of my speech that I need to improve. The first, and most basic, is that I need to improve my articulation.  this will come about with significant repetition when I learn to move my mouth muscles from place to place quicker in order to produce sounds clearer. The second, and more complex, is that I need to put better stress on multisyllabic words. For example, take the word "mixy". Sounds simple, right? However, for me, it isn't so. When I say it, the computer registers "mixy" as two separate words- "make" and "sea"- because I have a tendency to deconstruct multisyllabic words into their individual syllables. I need to learn how to stress a certain syllable, saying instead "MIXy". These details are interesting to me because they inform what I need to practice. For an hour each day, I do tongue twisters and then loop over a large set of phonetically-rich sentences for realistic practice. Throughout all that time that I am practicing, I turn on a transcription application on my smartphone to get real-time feedback on how the dictation software is rating my speech output.

I am able to return to doing science because of artificial intelligence. In addition to powering the dictation software that I use, it is behind GitHub Co-Pilot which makes suggestions for me as I write code. And I use ChatGPT for a variety of purposes, ranging from correcting punctuation, capitalization, and other typos in my dictated prose to helping me understand the code that I am writing better.

In this context, I find inspiration in the story of Stephen Hawking. At the age of 22, he was diagnosed with ALS, and doctors gave him 2 years to live. He ended up having a fruitful academic career until the age of 76. Early on, he lost the ability to speak. However, a team from Intel figured out a way for him to communicate by converting movements of his cheek muscles into speech. I have had a similar experience with assistive technology, which in my case is artificial intelligence. From his example, it is clear to me that my academic career will in no way be inhibited by my motor impairment.
